Title: Conformalized Generative Bayesian Imaging: An Uncertainty Quantification   Framework for Computational Imaging
Published: 2025-04-10T12:30:46Z
DOI/ID: http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.07696v2
Categories: eess.IV, cs.LG
Abstract:
Uncertainty quantification plays an important role in achieving trustworthy and reliable learning-based computational imaging. Recent advances in generative modeling and Bayesian neural networks have enabled the development of uncertainty-aware image reconstruction methods. Current generative model-based methods seek to quantify the inherent (aleatoric) uncertainty on the underlying image for given measurements by learning to sample from the posterior distribution of the underlying image. On the other hand, Bayesian neural network-based approaches aim to quantify the model (epistemic) uncertainty on the parameters of a deep neural network-based reconstruction method by approximating the posterior distribution of those parameters. Unfortunately, an ongoing need for an inversion method that can jointly quantify complex aleatoric uncertainty and epistemic uncertainty patterns still persists. In this paper, we present a scalable framework that can quantify both aleatoric and epistemic uncertainties. The proposed framework accepts an existing generative model-based posterior sampling method as an input and introduces an epistemic uncertainty quantification capability through Bayesian neural networks with latent variables and deep ensembling. Furthermore, by leveraging the conformal prediction methodology, the proposed framework can be easily calibrated to ensure rigorous uncertainty quantification. We evaluated the proposed framework on magnetic resonance imaging, computed tomography, and image inpainting problems and showed that the epistemic and aleatoric uncertainty estimates produced by the proposed framework display the characteristic features of true epistemic and aleatoric uncertainties. Furthermore, our results demonstrated that the use of conformal prediction on top of the proposed framework enables marginal coverage guarantees consistent with frequentist principles.
