Title: Combining Bayesian Inference and Reinforcement Learning for Agent   Decision Making: A Review
Published: 2025-05-12T13:34:50Z
DOI/ID: http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.07911v1
Categories: cs.LG, cs.AI
Abstract:
Bayesian inference has many advantages in decision making of agents (e.g. robotics/simulative agent) over a regular data-driven black-box neural network: Data-efficiency, generalization, interpretability, and safety where these advantages benefit directly/indirectly from the uncertainty quantification of Bayesian inference. However, there are few comprehensive reviews to summarize the progress of Bayesian inference on reinforcement learning (RL) for decision making to give researchers a systematic understanding. This paper focuses on combining Bayesian inference with RL that nowadays is an important approach in agent decision making. To be exact, this paper discusses the following five topics: 1) Bayesian methods that have potential for agent decision making. First basic Bayesian methods and models (Bayesian rule, Bayesian learning, and Bayesian conjugate models) are discussed followed by variational inference, Bayesian optimization, Bayesian deep learning, Bayesian active learning, Bayesian generative models, Bayesian meta-learning, and lifelong Bayesian learning. 2) Classical combinations of Bayesian methods with model-based RL (with approximation methods), model-free RL, and inverse RL. 3) Latest combinations of potential Bayesian methods with RL. 4) Analytical comparisons of methods that combine Bayesian methods with RL with respect to data-efficiency, generalization, interpretability, and safety. 5) In-depth discussions in six complex problem variants of RL, including unknown reward, partial-observability, multi-agent, multi-task, non-linear non-Gaussian, and hierarchical RL problems and the summary of how Bayesian methods work in the data collection, data processing and policy learning stages of RL to pave the way for better agent decision-making strategies.
