Title: Conformal Prediction Beyond the Seen: A Missing Mass Perspective for   Uncertainty Quantification in Generative Models
Published: 2025-06-05T18:26:14Z
DOI/ID: http://arxiv.org/abs/2506.05497v1
Categories: cs.LG, cs.AI
Abstract:
Uncertainty quantification (UQ) is essential for safe deployment of generative AI models such as large language models (LLMs), especially in high stakes applications. Conformal prediction (CP) offers a principled uncertainty quantification framework, but classical methods focus on regression and classification, relying on geometric distances or softmax scores: tools that presuppose structured outputs. We depart from this paradigm by studying CP in a query only setting, where prediction sets must be constructed solely from finite queries to a black box generative model, introducing a new trade off between coverage, test time query budget, and informativeness. We introduce Conformal Prediction with Query Oracle (CPQ), a framework characterizing the optimal interplay between these objectives. Our finite sample algorithm is built on two core principles: one governs the optimal query policy, and the other defines the optimal mapping from queried samples to prediction sets. Remarkably, both are rooted in the classical missing mass problem in statistics. Specifically, the optimal query policy depends on the rate of decay, or the derivative, of the missing mass, for which we develop a novel estimator. Meanwhile, the optimal mapping hinges on the missing mass itself, which we estimate using Good Turing estimators. We then turn our focus to implementing our method for language models, where outputs are vast, variable, and often under specified. Fine grained experiments on three real world open ended tasks and two LLMs, show CPQ applicability to any black box LLM and highlight: (1) individual contribution of each principle to CPQ performance, and (2) CPQ ability to yield significantly more informative prediction sets than existing conformal methods for language uncertainty quantification.
