Title: BiLO: Bilevel Local Operator Learning for PDE Inverse Problems. Part II:   Efficient Uncertainty Quantification with Low-Rank Adaptation
Published: 2025-07-22T21:20:20Z
DOI/ID: http://arxiv.org/abs/2507.17019v1
Categories: cs.LG, 65M32 65M32 65M32, I.2.6; G.1.8
Abstract:
Uncertainty quantification and inverse problems governed by partial differential equations (PDEs) are central to a wide range of scientific and engineering applications. In this second part of a two part series, we extend Bilevel Local Operator Learning (BiLO) for PDE-constrained optimization problems developed in Part 1 to the Bayesian inference framework. At the lower level, we train a network to approximate the local solution operator by minimizing the local operator loss with respect to the weights of the neural network. At the upper level, we sample the PDE parameters from the posterior distribution. We achieve efficient sampling through gradient-based Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods and low-rank adaptation (LoRA). Compared with existing methods based on Bayesian neural networks, our approach bypasses the challenge of sampling in the high-dimensional space of neural network weights and does not require specifying a prior distribution on the neural network solution. Instead, uncertainty propagates naturally from the data through the PDE constraints. By enforcing strong PDE constraints, the proposed method improves the accuracy of both parameter inference and uncertainty quantification. We analyze the dynamic error of the gradient in the MCMC sampler and the static error in the posterior distribution due to inexact minimization of the lower level problem and demonstrate a direct link between the tolerance for solving the lower level problem and the accuracy of the resulting uncertainty quantification. Through numerical experiments across a variety of PDE models, we demonstrate that our method delivers accurate inference and quantification of uncertainties while maintaining high computational efficiency.
