Title: A Novel Framework for Uncertainty Quantification via Proper Scores for   Classification and Beyond
Published: 2025-08-25T13:11:03Z
DOI/ID: http://dx.doi.org/10.21248/gups.93204
Categories: cs.LG, stat.ML
Abstract:
In this PhD thesis, we propose a novel framework for uncertainty quantification in machine learning, which is based on proper scores. Uncertainty quantification is an important cornerstone for trustworthy and reliable machine learning applications in practice. Usually, approaches to uncertainty quantification are problem-specific, and solutions and insights cannot be readily transferred from one task to another. Proper scores are loss functions minimized by predicting the target distribution. Due to their very general definition, proper scores apply to regression, classification, or even generative modeling tasks. We contribute several theoretical results, that connect epistemic uncertainty, aleatoric uncertainty, and model calibration with proper scores, resulting in a general and widely applicable framework. We achieve this by introducing a general bias-variance decomposition for strictly proper scores via functional Bregman divergences. Specifically, we use the kernel score, a kernel-based proper score, for evaluating sample-based generative models in various domains, like image, audio, and natural language generation. This includes a novel approach for uncertainty estimation of large language models, which outperforms state-of-the-art baselines. Further, we generalize the calibration-sharpness decomposition beyond classification, which motivates the definition of proper calibration errors. We then introduce a novel estimator for proper calibration errors in classification, and a novel risk-based approach to compare different estimators for squared calibration errors. Last, we offer a decomposition of the kernel spherical score, another kernel-based proper score, allowing a more fine-grained and interpretable evaluation of generative image models.
